Stakeholder Engagement Update



Central Government 

Officers continue to meet with the Cities & Local Growth Unit on a monthly basis to update officials on the work of LEAP and delivery of growth programmes. 

London Government:

Officers continue to deliver a programme of engagement with the Economic Development teams at London’s local authorities and have recently met with the City of Westminster’s Economic Development team.

LEAP Events:

Jules Pipe, Simon Pitkeathley, Celia Caulcott and Natalie Campbell launched the Mayor’s Good Growth Fund at an  on 29 June 2017. The fund supports projects that are inclusive, innovative and which demonstrate an outstanding approach to challenges faced across London. The launch was attended by London boroughs, community groups and charities who will promote the fund in their local areas. A follow-up workshop was also held in order to support potential bidders with their applications. An oral update on Expressions of Interest received will be provided at the meeting following the Investment Committee’s consideration on 19 September 2017. 

Business Representative Organisations 

Officers supporting LEAP continue to meet with various Business Representation Organisations (BROs) including the FSB.

London’s businesses:

The Deputy Mayor for Business continues to engage with businesses on a regular basis, championing the work of LEAP and the London Growth Hub. 

On the 11th of July, The British Library and The London Growth Hub launched the Scale Up summit where some of the best-known entrepreneurs in Britain came to talk about the four key issues and opportunities businesses need to tackle to achieve their scale up ambitions. As part of the event Simon Pitkeathley hosted a round-table with 17 scale-up businesses.

Officers continue to liaise the Borough Market Trust and the Portobello Business Centre in order to ensure businesses at Borough market and Grenfell are supported through the Mayor’s Business Continuity Fund, which the LEAP has contributed £100,000 towards.

On 18 July the Growth Hub exhibited at the Bromley Means Business event which brought hundreds of local business owners, managers, start ups and entrepreneurs together. 

The London Growth Hub exhibited at the Saverah Women Expo 2017, the UK's largest event for Muslim women owned start-ups. The Growth Hub directly engaged with 40 start-ups, with over 1,000 attendees at the event. 

A new series of business case study videos have now been produced for Brompton, SLE, European Springs & Pressings and Alex Monroe focusing on the businesses within the manufacturing sector. These and other case studies are published on the LEAP’s . 

Simon Pitkeathley continues to promote the interests of small businesses in the capital and has recently met with a range of core stakeholders including the FSB. 

Business Support providers:

The Deputy Mayor met with Capital Enterprise - the network for organisations that support London’s Entrepreneurs and follow-up meetings have taken place at officer-level. Officers have also met with Enterprise Nation, Natwest’s Entrepreneurial Spark programme, the Trampery, and Enterprise for London.

Greg Clark has played a key role in the development of London & Partners three-year corporate strategy steering group. 

Cross LEP working:

Officers recently attended meetings of the LEP Network CEO group to hear from central government on emerging plans for post-EU funding, support for scale-up businesses, the ongoing LEP governance review, local Industrial Strategies, data gathering and case studies of best practice from other LEPs.

Officers have met with Chief Executives of LEPs in the Thames Valley to present on the London Plan and the Economic Development Strategy and have had a separate meeting with the South East LEP to discuss their how work to develop the London Plan aligns with their current refresh of their Strategic Economic Plan.

Angus Knowles-Cutler has joined the LEP Network Management Board and will be taking part in regular meetings with other LEPs in the Thames Valley area. Further engagement is planned with other contiguous LEPs and core cities.

Simon Pitkeathley attended Supporting Place’s LEP’s Consultation in Manchester focused on how nationally coordinated intelligence can support LEPs and CAs in realising place-based growth through innovation. 

